docs/usage-guide.md, before:

# Usage Guide

This guide outlines typical workflows using the `bitbat` CLI. All commands are implemented in `src/bitbat/cli.py` and validated by contract-enforcing helpers.

## Installation & Environment

1. Install dependencies with Poetry:
   ```bash
   poetry install
   ```
2. Use the virtual environment for commands:
   ```bash
   poetry run bitbat --help
   ```

## Configuration

- Default config is `src/bitbat/config/default.yaml` (`data_dir`, `freq`, `horizon`, `tau`, etc.).
- Override via `--config path/to/config.yaml` or the `BITBAT_CONFIG` environment variable.
- The `enable_sentiment` toggle controls whether sentiment features are required/used by feature build, CV/train/infer dataset validation, and batch inference.
- Global CLI options:
  - `--config FILE`: Load a specific config file.
  - `--version`: Print package version and exit.

## Streamlit UI

The Streamlit app provides the same workflow coverage as the CLI (ingest → features → model → predictions → monitor/backtest) and reads the same configuration values: `data_dir`, `freq`, `horizon`, and `tau`.

Run it with:
```bash
poetry run streamlit run streamlit/app.py
# or
make streamlit
```

Outputs are written to the same locations as the CLI:
- `${data_dir}/raw/` for ingested data
- `${data_dir}/features/{freq}_{horizon}/` for datasets + metadata
- `models/{freq}_{horizon}/` for trained models
- `${data_dir}/predictions/{freq}_{horizon}.parquet` for predictions
- `metrics/live_{freq}_{horizon}.json` for monitoring snapshots

## Data Ingestion

### Prices
```bash
poetry run bitbat prices pull --symbol BTC-USD --interval 1h --start 2017-01-01
```
- Writes partitioned parquet under `${data_dir}/raw/prices/` and enforces the prices contract.
- Options:
  - `--symbol` (required)
  - `--start` (required, ISO date/datetime)
  - `--interval` (defaults to config `freq`)
  - `--output` (optional output directory override)

### News
```bash
poetry run bitbat news pull --from 2024-01-01T00:00:00 --to 2024-01-02T00:00:00
```
- Writes GDELT-derived parquet under `${data_dir}/raw/news/gdelt_1h/`.
- Options:
  - `--from` (required, ISO8601 datetime)
  - `--to` (required, ISO8601 datetime)
  - `--output` (optional output directory override)

#### GDELT limits & price-only workflow
- GDELT ingestion is historical-only and capped at 30 days per pull (use incremental ranges). Default throttling/retry values are `news_throttle_seconds: 10.0` and `news_retry_limit: 30` from `src/bitbat/config/default.yaml`.
- Recommended realtime approach is price-only: disable sentiment **before** running `bitbat features build`, `bitbat model train`, and downstream steps by setting `enable_sentiment: false` in `src/bitbat/config/default.yaml` or unchecking the Streamlit "Enable sentiment" checkbox.
- The CLI reads `enable_sentiment` from config for `bitbat features build`, `bitbat model cv`, `bitbat model train`, `bitbat model infer`, and `bitbat batch run` (feature contract expectations follow the same toggle). The Streamlit ingest page is for historical GDELT pulls only.

## Feature Engineering
```bash
poetry run bitbat features build --start 2024-01-01T00:00:00 --end 2024-02-01T00:00:00
```
- Produces `${data_dir}/features/{freq}_{horizon}/dataset.parquet` plus `meta.json`.
- Features are `feat_*` columns; includes `label` and `r_forward` for training.
- Options:
  - `--start` / `--end` (optional; defaults to min/max available price timestamps)
  - `--tau` (optional; defaults to config `tau`)

## Model Workflows

- **Cross-validation**:
  ```bash
  poetry run bitbat model cv --start 2024-01-01T00:00:00 --end 2024-02-01T00:00:00
  ```
  Uses walk-forward splits with a 1-bar embargo.
  Options: `--start`, `--end`, `--freq`, `--horizon`, `--tau`, `--windows`.
  `--windows` accepts repeated 4-value tuples:
  `train_start train_end test_start test_end`.

- **Training**:
  ```bash
  poetry run bitbat model train
  ```
  Loads the contract dataset, fits XGBoost, saves model artifact to:
  `models/{freq}_{horizon}/xgb.json`.
  Options: `--freq`, `--horizon`, `--class-weights/--no-class-weights`.

- **Inference**:
  ```bash
  poetry run bitbat model infer --features path/to/features.parquet --output predictions.parquet
  ```
  Validates feature contract, predicts per-row, outputs contract-compliant predictions.
  Options: `--features` (required), `--output`, `--model`, `--freq`, `--horizon`.
  If `--output` is omitted, predictions are printed as JSON to stdout.
  `model_version` in inference output defaults to the package version.

## Batch Operations

- **Run**: Generates the latest prediction and appends/deduplicates.
  ```bash
  poetry run bitbat batch run
  ```
  Options: `--freq`, `--horizon`, `--model-version`.
  Output path: `${data_dir}/predictions/{freq}_{horizon}.parquet`.
  Deduplication key: `timestamp_utc`, `horizon`, `model_version`.
  If `--model-version` is omitted, version defaults to the package version.

- **Realize**: Fills in realized returns/labels once the horizon has elapsed.
  ```bash
  poetry run bitbat batch realize --tau 0.01
  ```
  Options: `--freq`, `--horizon`, `--tau` (defaults to config `tau`).

## Backtesting & Monitoring

- **Backtest**:
  ```bash
  poetry run bitbat backtest run --enter-threshold 0.6 --allow-short
  ```
  Options: `--freq`, `--horizon`, `--enter-threshold`,
  `--allow-short`, `--no-allow-short`, `--cost-bps/--cost_bps`.

- **Monitor**:
  ```bash
  poetry run bitbat monitor refresh --cost-bps 4
  ```
  Options: `--freq`, `--horizon`, `--cost-bps/--cost_bps`.
  Writes live metrics to `metrics/live_{freq}_{horizon}.json`.
  Snapshot fields: `count`, `avg_p_up`, `avg_p_down`,
  `realized_count`, `hit_rate`, `updated_at`.

## Testing & Quality Checks

- Lint: `poetry run ruff check src tests`
- Type check: `poetry run mypy src tests`
- Tests: `poetry run pytest`

Refer to [Testing & Quality](./testing-quality.md) for more guardrail details.

Commit message:

replaced gdelt with cryptocompare for training data recopilation

docs/usage-guide.md, after:

# Usage Guide

This guide outlines typical workflows using the `bitbat` CLI. All commands are implemented in `src/bitbat/cli.py` and validated by contract-enforcing helpers.

## Installation & Environment

1. Install dependencies with Poetry:
   ```bash
   poetry install
   ```
2. Use the virtual environment for commands:
   ```bash
   poetry run bitbat --help
   ```

## Configuration

- Default config is `src/bitbat/config/default.yaml` (`data_dir`, `freq`, `horizon`, `tau`, etc.).
- Override via `--config path/to/config.yaml` or the `BITBAT_CONFIG` environment variable.
- The `enable_sentiment` toggle controls whether sentiment features are required/used by feature build, CV/train/infer dataset validation, and batch inference.
- Global CLI options:
  - `--config FILE`: Load a specific config file.
  - `--version`: Print package version and exit.

## Streamlit UI

The Streamlit app provides the same workflow coverage as the CLI (ingest → features → model → predictions → monitor/backtest) and reads the same configuration values: `data_dir`, `freq`, `horizon`, and `tau`.

Run it with:
```bash
poetry run streamlit run streamlit/app.py
# or
make streamlit
```

Outputs are written to the same locations as the CLI:
- `${data_dir}/raw/` for ingested data
- `${data_dir}/features/{freq}_{horizon}/` for datasets + metadata
- `models/{freq}_{horizon}/` for trained models
- `${data_dir}/predictions/{freq}_{horizon}.parquet` for predictions
- `metrics/live_{freq}_{horizon}.json` for monitoring snapshots

## Data Ingestion

### Prices
```bash
poetry run bitbat prices pull --symbol BTC-USD --interval 1h --start 2017-01-01
```
- Writes partitioned parquet under `${data_dir}/raw/prices/` and enforces the prices contract.
- Options:
  - `--symbol` (required)
  - `--start` (required, ISO date/datetime)
  - `--interval` (defaults to config `freq`)
  - `--output` (optional output directory override)

### News
```bash
poetry run bitbat news pull --from 2024-01-01T00:00:00 --to 2024-01-02T00:00:00
```
- Uses config `news_source` (default: `cryptocompare`) and writes source-specific parquet under `${data_dir}/raw/news/{source}_1h/`.
- Options:
  - `--from` (required, ISO8601 datetime)
  - `--to` (required, ISO8601 datetime)
  - `--source` (`cryptocompare` or `gdelt`; optional override)
  - `--output` (optional output directory override)

#### Historical Backfill Notes
- `cryptocompare` is the primary historical source for base-training backfills.
- `gdelt` remains available as a fallback source (historical and often more brittle at scale).
- Default throttling/retry values are `news_throttle_seconds: 10.0` and `news_retry_limit: 30` from `src/bitbat/config/default.yaml`.
- Recommended realtime approach is price-only: disable sentiment **before** running `bitbat features build`, `bitbat model train`, and downstream steps by setting `enable_sentiment: false` in `src/bitbat/config/default.yaml` or unchecking the Streamlit "Enable sentiment" checkbox.
- The CLI reads `enable_sentiment` from config for `bitbat features build`, `bitbat model cv`, `bitbat model train`, `bitbat model infer`, and `bitbat batch run` (feature contract expectations follow the same toggle). The Streamlit ingest page also follows `news_source`.

## Feature Engineering
```bash
poetry run bitbat features build --start 2024-01-01T00:00:00 --end 2024-02-01T00:00:00
```
- Produces `${data_dir}/features/{freq}_{horizon}/dataset.parquet` plus `meta.json`.
- Features are `feat_*` columns; includes `label` and `r_forward` for training.
- Options:
  - `--start` / `--end` (optional; defaults to min/max available price timestamps)
  - `--tau` (optional; defaults to config `tau`)

## Model Workflows

- **Cross-validation**:
  ```bash
  poetry run bitbat model cv --start 2024-01-01T00:00:00 --end 2024-02-01T00:00:00
  ```
  Uses walk-forward splits with a 1-bar embargo.
  Options: `--start`, `--end`, `--freq`, `--horizon`, `--tau`, `--windows`.
  `--windows` accepts repeated 4-value tuples:
  `train_start train_end test_start test_end`.

- **Training**:
  ```bash
  poetry run bitbat model train
  ```
  Loads the contract dataset, fits XGBoost, saves model artifact to:
  `models/{freq}_{horizon}/xgb.json`.
  Options: `--freq`, `--horizon`, `--class-weights/--no-class-weights`.

- **Inference**:
  ```bash
  poetry run bitbat model infer --features path/to/features.parquet --output predictions.parquet
  ```
  Validates feature contract, predicts per-row, outputs contract-compliant predictions.
  Options: `--features` (required), `--output`, `--model`, `--freq`, `--horizon`.
  If `--output` is omitted, predictions are printed as JSON to stdout.
  `model_version` in inference output defaults to the package version.

## Batch Operations

- **Run**: Generates the latest prediction and appends/deduplicates.
  ```bash
  poetry run bitbat batch run
  ```
  Options: `--freq`, `--horizon`, `--model-version`.
  Output path: `${data_dir}/predictions/{freq}_{horizon}.parquet`.
  Deduplication key: `timestamp_utc`, `horizon`, `model_version`.
  If `--model-version` is omitted, version defaults to the package version.

- **Realize**: Fills in realized returns/labels once the horizon has elapsed.
  ```bash
  poetry run bitbat batch realize --tau 0.01
  ```
  Options: `--freq`, `--horizon`, `--tau` (defaults to config `tau`).

## Backtesting & Monitoring

- **Backtest**:
  ```bash
  poetry run bitbat backtest run --enter-threshold 0.6 --allow-short
  ```
  Options: `--freq`, `--horizon`, `--enter-threshold`,
  `--allow-short`, `--no-allow-short`, `--cost-bps/--cost_bps`.

- **Monitor**:
  ```bash
  poetry run bitbat monitor refresh --cost-bps 4
  ```
  Options: `--freq`, `--horizon`, `--cost-bps/--cost_bps`.
  Writes live metrics to `metrics/live_{freq}_{horizon}.json`.
  Snapshot fields: `count`, `avg_p_up`, `avg_p_down`,
  `realized_count`, `hit_rate`, `updated_at`.

## Testing & Quality Checks

- Lint: `poetry run ruff check src tests`
- Type check: `poetry run mypy src tests`
- Tests: `poetry run pytest`

Refer to [Testing & Quality](./testing-quality.md) for more guardrail details.
